#SOCIAL CHANGE:

The concepts of social control, deviance and conflict. All these concepts help us
to understand the universal process of change in society.

“Social change refers to fundamental alterations in the patterns of culture,
structure, social insitutions, and social behavior over time.”

Alterations may occur in norms, values, cultural
products and symbols in a society.

The social change is also known as social progress or sociocultural evolution.

Example of social change:

A significant social change occurred in the form of drastic shift from an
agricultural society to industrialized and post-modern society.

Gemeinschaft to Gesellschaft-Ferdinand Tonnies 

Gemeinschaft = community = individuals bounded together by common norms, often because of shared physical
space and shared beliefs. Strong group solidarity like rural villages

Gesellschaft=society, temporary and impersonal, traditional values weak, individual
goals more important than group's

Nature of Social Change: It is universal, covers the whole community,
Continuous process, influenced by time, differing from one society to other

Main theories about social change:

1. Evolutionary theories:

Auguste Comte, Morgan, and Spencer. Society is a constant process of evolution. From simple it becomes complex.
They consider social change is positive. Positive=progress.
Theory highly influenced by Darwin's theory of organic evolution. They consider the society to be an organism to understand social evolution.

2. Cyclical theories:

Social change that focuses on rise and fall of civilizations and look at the patterns of growth and decay.
All civilizations have a life-like birth, maturity, old age and death.
Sorokin, Toynbee, Spengler major theorists.
In view of Spengler, social change occurs in a cycle, from where we start after roaming, we again reach the same
place.

Example: The Roman Empire rose to power and then gradually collapsed.

No society lives forever.

3. Conflict Theories: Conflict is constant and societies change due to conflict.

A number of social theorists have espoused this approach such as Karl Marx, Lewis
Coser, and Ralf Dahrendorf.

Society is dynamic and not static (means change happens). Conflict is normal, not an abnormal process.
Society is constantly in conflict over resources, conflict drives social change.

4. Functional theories:

Functionalists accept change as a constant, does not need to be explained.
Useful changes are accepted, dysfunctional changes are rejected.
Changes disrupt the equilibrium of a society.
Society is like a human body and each part is like an organ. Individuals cant survive on their own.

Emile Durkheim, a major leader in the social sciences, believed that all
parts of a society must be harmonious.

Example: the government provides education for the children of the
family, which in turn pays taxes on which the state depends to keep itself
running.

Factors influencing social change:

1-Natural factors: Storms, earthquakes can force people to change the way they live. They might become poor.

2-Cultural Factors: Social life changes when our beliefs or ideas change. For example,
women were not allowed to get education but now they are, and they are becoming independent.

3-Science and Technology factors:

Changes the physical environment, for example machines and AI have reduced the amount a work a human can do.

4-Biological factors:

Every human generation is different from the previous generation. Different ideas, etc.

5-Demographic factors: If population increases, people might have less jobs and will become more poor.
If population is less, there might not be enough people to work.

#Social Interaction and Social Structure:

Social interactions=communication/expression exchange between two or more individuals/groups 

Methods of communication: verbal and non-verbal. Through symbols, language, gestures or expression of ideas.

5 types of social interactions:

1. Exchange:

Exchange is a type of social interaction where an individual or a group acts in a certain way toward
another individual or group to receive a reward.

The most common type of exchange relationship is between an employer and an employee.

2. Cooperation:

Cooperation is interaction in which individuals or
groups act together to promote common interests
or achieve common goals.

3. Competition:

Competition is a rivalry where two or more parties strive for a common goal which cannot be shared: where
one's gain is the other's loss.

Competition can be both positive and negative. It can motivate people but can also lead to jealousy, lack of cooperation and conflict.

4. Conformity:

Conformity is all behavior that is in accord with the social norms and values of a given social group.

A person might believe that stealing is not an issue if his friend says so.

5. Coercion:

Compelling an individual or group—either intellectually, morally,
or physically—to do something; using force or threatening to use
force.

Most common is boycotting another person/group economically or socially.

Social structure is the foundation in which human beings organize themselves into both
simple and complex groups to provide understanding, community purpose and security for all members.

The major components of social structure include culture, social class, social
status, roles, groups, and social institutions.

1. Status: 

Each individual in society occupies several statuses.

A status set is all of the statuses that a person occupies at any particular
time.

An individual can be a father, a teacher and other things at once.

A status is a socially defined position/rank in
society characterized by certain expectations,
rights and duties.

Types of status: 

Ascribed Status: given to individual generally at
birth and from which they cannot escape. For example, height, etc.

Achieved Status: Positions that are achieved by individuals
for themselves ; these status can change. For example, doctor etc.

Master status: the most important status that a person
occupies. The dominant one or a status which they view as
the most important part of their identity. For example, religion and etc

2. Roles:

A role a person with a status has to perform.

Role conflict: A role conflict is when a person is expected to fulfill the
duties of two contradictory positions.

For example, if a person is a dad and a coach, and he has a son, who he wants to play in the team.
However, if he is not good enough he will have to select other players to win.

Role Strain: occurs when incompatible role demands develop within a
single status.

A worker being asked to do his work as well as the other worker's pending work.

3. Social institution:

A place where group of people who come together for common purpose.

the organized, usual, or standard ways by which society meets its basic needs

The family, religion, law, politics, economics, education, science, medicine, and the
military all are social institutions.

Exists in every society.

Each institution has its own groups, status, values, and norms.

5 major social institutions:

1. Family:

Primary and universal social instituion.

It is considered a "building block" of society because it is the
primary unit through which socialization occurs.

Basic unit: marriage.

To provide a sense of identity or belonging among its members.

To transmit culture between generations.

2. EDUCATION

It is the social institution through which society provides its members with
knowledge, including basic facts, job skills, and cultural norms and values.

Examples of educational institutes include elementary schools, junior schools, open
universities, and vocational training institutes.

3. ECONOMY

Production, distribution and consumption of good and services

It regulates the economic needs of society.

4. POLITICS/ GOVERNMENT

Policy makers

Implement Laws

It is responsible for maintaining order, protecting citizens from harm, and providing
for the common good.

5. RELIGION

It is an organized system of beliefs and practices designed to fill the human need for meaning
and purpose (Durkheim, 1915).

Religion can be used to instill moral values and socialize individuals into a community. Religion
plays a significant role in shaping the way people view themselves and the world around them.

SOCIAL GROUP

Any number of individuals that share common values, goals and interact on a regular basis.

Examples: our families, friend groups, workplaces

Types of social group:

Primary group: Small of people, emotional relationships. For example, family and peer group

Secondary group: Large in size, formal relationships. For example, Recreational activities clubs

The term social construction of
reality refers to the theory that the way we
present ourselves to other people is shaped
partly by our interactions with others, as
well as by our life experiences.

DRAMATURGY

Dramaturgy is a sociological concept developed by Erving Goffman that uses the metaphor of theater to explain human
behavior.

Impression Management: the sum total of actions we take — both consciously and unconsciously — to influence how
others perceive us.

Front stage self and back stage self

The front stage self encompasses the behavior a player (person) performs in front of an audience (usually
society, or some subset of society).

Back stage Self: In contrast, we may only let our guard down and fully relax when we're by ourselves or familiar people
— here we're back stage.

Types of societies: Preindustrial (Agricultural) Industrial and Postindustrial (Smartphones etc)


